Initial documentation for modular telemetry (#175)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/user/02-logs.md

## Architecture

### Fluent Bit

The Telemetry module provides [Fluent Bit](https://fluentbit.io/) as a log agent. Fluent Bit collects all application logs of the cluster workload and ships them to a backend.

![Architecture](./assets/logging-arch.drawio.svg)

1. Container logs are stored by the Kubernetes container runtime under the `var/log` directory and its subdirectories.
2. Fluent Bit runs as a [DaemonSet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/) (one instance per node), detects any new log files in the folder, and tails them using a filesystem buffer for reliability.
3. Fluent Bit queries the [Kubernetes API Server](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-apiserver/) for additional Pod metadata, such as Pod annotations and labels.
4. The Telemetry module configures Fluent Bit with your custom output configuration.

> 5. If Kyma's [deprecated](https://kyma-project.io/blog/2022/11/2/loki-deprecation/) logging component is installed, the operator configures the shipment to the in-cluster Loki instance automatically.

Author: ```suggestion
5. If Kyma's [deprecated](https://kyma-project.io/blog/2022/11/2/loki-deprecation/) logging component is installed, the Telemetry manager configures the shipment to the in-cluster Loki instance automatically.
```

Kyma's Telemetry module brings a predefined setup of the Fluent Bit DaemonSet and a base configuration, which assures that the application logs of the workloads in the cluster are processed reliably and efficiently. Additionally, the telemetry module provides a Kubernetes API called `LogPipeline` to configure outputs with some filtering capabilities.

![Pipeline Concept](./assets/logging-pipelines.drawio.svg)

1. A central `tail` input plugin reads the application logs.

2. The application logs are enriched by the `kubernetes` filter. Then, for every LogPipeline definition, a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated, which uses a dedicated `tag` with the name `<logpipeline>.*`, followed by the custom configuration defined in the LogPipeline resource. You can add your own filters to the default filters.

3. Based on the default and custom filters, you get the desired output for each `LogPipeline`.

This approach assures a reliable buffer management and isolation of pipelines, while keeping flexibility on customizations.

> ### Telemetry Operator

Author: ```suggestion
### Telemetry Manager
```

> The LogPipeline resource is managed by the Telemetry Operator, a typical Kubernetes operator responsible for managing the custom parts of the Fluent Bit configuration.

Author: ```suggestion
The LogPipeline resource is managed by the Telemetry manager, a typical Kubernetes operator responsible for managing the custom parts of the Fluent Bit configuration.
```

### Step 4: Add authentication details from Secrets

Integrations into external systems usually need authentication details dealing with sensitive data. To handle that data properly in Secrets, the LogPipeline supports the reference of Secrets.

Using the **http** output definition and the **valueFrom** attribute, you can map Secret keys as in the following **http** output example:

```yaml
kind: LogPipeline
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: http-backend
spec:
  output:
     http:
        dedot: false
        port: "80"
        uri: "/"
        host:
           valueFrom:
              secretKeyRef:
                 name: http-backend-credentials
                 namespace: default
                 key: HTTP_ENDPOINT
        user:
           valueFrom:
              secretKeyRef:
                 name: http-backend-credentials
                 namespace: default
                 key: HTTP_USER
        password:
           valueFrom:
              secretKeyRef:
                 name: http-backend-credentials
                 namespace: default
                 key: HTTP_PASSWORD
  input:
    ...
  filters:
    ...
```

> The related Secret must fulfill the referenced name and Namespace, and contain the mapped key as in the following example:

Reviewer: "fulfil" or "fill out"?

Author: the thingy equal to "satisfy". The secret must have that name.

```yaml
kind: Secret
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: http-backend-credentials
stringData:
  HTTP_ENDPOINT: https://myhost/logs
  HTTP_USER: myUser
  HTTP_PASSWORD: XXX
```

To leverage data provided by the Kubernetes Secrets in a `custom` output definition, use placeholder expressions for the data provided by the Secret, then specify the actual mapping to the Secret keys in the **variables** section, like in the following example:

```yaml
kind: LogPipeline
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: http-backend
spec:
  output:
    custom: |
      Name               http
      Host               ${ENDPOINT} # Defined in Secret
      HTTP_User          ${USER} # Defined in Secret
      HTTP_Password      ${PASSWORD} # Defined in Secret
      Tls                On
  variables:
    - name: ENDPOINT
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
        - name: http-backend-credentials
          namespace: default
          key: HTTP_ENDPOINT
  input:
    ...
  filters:
    ...
```
> **NOTE:** If you use a `custom` output, you put the LogPipeline in the [unsupported mode](#unsupported-mode).

### Step 5: Rotate the Secret

> As used in the previous step, a Secret referenced with the **secretKeyRef** construct can be rotated manually or automatically. For automatic rotation, update the Secret's actual values and keep the Secret's keys stable. The LogPipeline watches the referenced Secrets and detects changes, so the Secret rotation takes immediate effect. When using a Secret owned by the [SAP BTP Operator](https://github.com/SAP/sap-btp-service-operator) you can configure a `credentialsRotationPolicy` with a specific `rotationFrequency` to achieve an automated rotation.

Author: Manual rotation is the default. For automation you need to do something

> As used in the previous step, a Secret referenced with the **secretKeyRef** construct can be rotated manually or automatically. For automatic rotation, update the Secret's actual values and keep the Secret's keys stable. The LogPipeline watches the referenced Secrets and detects changes, so the Secret rotation takes immediate effect. When using a Secret owned by the [SAP BTP Operator](https://github.com/SAP/sap-btp-service-operator) you can configure a `credentialsRotationPolicy` with a specific `rotationFrequency` to achieve an automated rotation.

Reviewer: Then we should mention that it's the default.

> As used in the previous step, a Secret referenced with the **secretKeyRef** construct can be rotated manually or automatically. For automatic rotation, update the Secret's actual values and keep the Secret's keys stable. The LogPipeline watches the referenced Secrets and detects changes, so the Secret rotation takes immediate effect. When using a Secret owned by the [SAP BTP Operator](https://github.com/SAP/sap-btp-service-operator) you can configure a `credentialsRotationPolicy` with a specific `rotationFrequency` to achieve an automated rotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As used in the previous step, a Secret referenced with the **secretKeyRef** construct can be rotated manually or automatically. If you don't want to rotate the Secret manually, set up automatic rotation: 

- Simply update the Secret's values and keep the Secret's keys stable. The LogPipeline watches the referenced Secrets and detects changes, so the Secret rotation takes immediate effect.
- Alternatively, if you use a Secret owned by the [SAP BTP Operator](https://github.com/SAP/sap-btp-service-operator), you can configure a `credentialsRotationPolicy` with a specific `rotationFrequency` to achieve an automated rotation.
```

      Regex ^(?<INT>[^ ]+) (?<FLOAT>[^ ]+) (?<BOOL>[^ ]+) (?<STRING>.+)$
```

The parser is referenced by its name in a filter of the pipeline and is activated for all logs of the pipeline.

```yaml
kind: LogPipeline
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: http-backend
spec:
  filters:
    - custom: |
        Name parser
        Parser dummy_test
  input:
    ...
  output:
    ...
```
> **NOTE:** If you use a `custom` output, you put the LogPipeline in the [unsupported mode](#unsupported-mode).

Instead of defining a filter, you can [annotate](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes#kubernetes-annotations) your workload in the following way (here, the parser is activated only for the annotated workload):

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: dummy
  annotations:
    fluentbit.io/parser: dummy_test
spec:
  ...
```

## Log record processing

After a log record has been read, it is preprocessed by centrally configured plugins, like the `kubernetes` filter. Thus, when a record is ready to be processed by the sections defined in the LogPipeline definition, it has several attributes available for processing and shipment.

> ![Flow](./assets/logging-flow.drawio.svg)

Author: 2. There is already a numbering in place. Prefixing it with "Step" sounds not meaningful to me as that are not steps performed by users. Instead I prefixed it with "Stage" as the log record is going through that pipeline passing that stages.
1. Here we are more talking about steps of configuration and a diagram is not that meaningful in my POV. It would just repeat the headlines and brings no additional value..

Kyma's Telemetry module brings a predefined setup of the Fluent Bit DaemonSet and a base configuration, which assures that the application logs of the workloads in the cluster are processed reliably and efficiently. Additionally, the telemetry module provides a Kubernetes API called `LogPipeline` to configure outputs with some filtering capabilities.

![Pipeline Concept](./assets/logging-pipelines.drawio.svg)

1. A central `tail` input plugin reads the application logs.

2. The application logs are enriched by the `kubernetes` filter. Then, for every LogPipeline definition, a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated, which uses a dedicated `tag` with the name `<logpipeline>.*`, followed by the custom configuration defined in the LogPipeline resource. You can add your own filters to the default filters.

3. Based on the default and custom filters, you get the desired output for each `LogPipeline`.

This approach assures a reliable buffer management and isolation of pipelines, while keeping flexibility on customizations.

> ### Telemetry Manager

Reviewer: We should definitely be consistent across the document. I don't think we have an alignment across the modules yet, whether they capitalize the manager or not, but I don't think we should wait for that.

> ### Telemetry Manager

Reviewer: good catch! reply here: https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/pull/175#discussion_r1221087891
